on a day nearly 4,000 years ago, in a town called menet khufubordering the
thin ribbon of the nile, a master scribe sketched out thehieroglyphs that told the
story of his lord's life—and in so doing heopened the recorded history of
cryptology. his was not a system of secretwriting as the modern world knows it;
he used no fully developed code of hieroglyphicsymbol substitutions. his
inscription, carved about 1900 b.c. into theliving rock in the main chamber of
the tomb of the noblemankhnumhotep ii, merely uses some unusual
hieroglyphic symbols hereand there in place of the more ordinary ones. most
occur in the last 20columns of the inscription's 222, in a section recording the
monumentsthat khnumhotep had erected in the service of the pharaoh
amenemhetii. the intention was not to make it hard to read the text. it was
toimpart a dignity and authority to it, perhaps in the same way that agovernment
proclamation will spell out "in the year of our lord onethousand eight hundred
and sixty three" instead of just writing "1863."the anonymous scribe may also
have been demonstrating his knowledgefor posterity. thus the inscription was
not secret writing, but itincorporated one of the essential elements of
cryptography: a deliberatetransformation of the writing. it is the oldest text
known to do so.the transformations occur in funerary formulas, in a hymn to
thoth,in a chapter of the book of the dead, on the sarcophagus of the pharaohseti
i, in royal titles displayed in luxor, on the architrave of the temple of luxor, on
stele, inlaudatory biographic inscriptions. there is nothing meant to beconcealed
in all this; indeed, many of the statements are repeated inordinary form right
next to the altered ones. why, then, thetransformations? Sometimes for
essentially the same reason as inkhnumhotep's tomb: to impress the reader. Occasionally for acalligraphic or decorative
effect; rarely, to indicate a contemporarypronunciation; perhaps even for a deliberate archaism as a
reactionagainst foreign influence.but many inscriptions are tinctured, for the
first time, with thesecond essential for cryptology—secrecy. in a few cases, the
secrecy wasintended to increase the mystery and hence the arcane magical
powers ofcertain religious texts. but the secrecy in many more cases resulted
from the understandable desire of the egyptians to have passersby read
theirepitaphs and so confer upon the departed the blessings written therein.in
egypt, with its concentration upon the afterlife, the number of theseinscriptions
soon proliferated to such an extent that the attention andthe goodwill of visitors
flagged. to revive their interest, the scribesdeliberately made the inscriptions a
bit obscure. they introduced thecryptographic signs to catch the reader's eye, make him wonder, andtempt him into
unriddling them — and so into reading the blessings. itwas a sort of madison avenue technique in the valley of the
kings. butthe technique failed utterly. instead of interesting the readers, itevidently destroyed even the slightest
desire to read the epitaphs, forsoon after the funerary cryptography was begun, it was abandoned.